@c page
@node srfi let-values
@appendixsec @ansrfi{11} syntax for receiving multiple values 


@cindex @srfi{} let-values


@noindent
The following library:

@example
(srfi let-values)
@end example

@noindent
is by Lars T Hansen as the reference implementation for @ansrfi{11}; see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-11/srfi-11.html}

@noindent
for more details.  The following documentation is an unofficial Texinfo
reformatting and minor modification of the original document by Marco
Maggi @email{marcomaggi@@gna.org} (Fri Oct 24, 2008).

@menu
* srfi let-values license::     Let-Values document license.
* srfi let-values abstract::    Abstract.
* srfi let-values rationale::   Rationale.
* srfi let-values spec::        Specification.
@end menu


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@c page
@node srfi let-values license
@appendixsubsec Let-Values document license


@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} 1999 Lars T Hansen.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS", WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS
OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@c page
@node srfi let-values abstract
@appendixsubsec Abstract


@noindent
This @srfi{} introduces syntactic forms @func{let-values} and
@func{let*-values} that bind the values of expressions that return
multiple values.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@c page
@node srfi let-values rationale
@appendixsubsec Rationale


@noindent
@func{let-values} and @func{let*-values} reduce the clutter of the
@func{call-with-values} notation for receiving multiple values.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@c page
@node srfi let-values spec
@appendixsubsec Specification


@cindex @srfi{} let-values @api{}


@deffn Syntax let-values ((@var{formals} @var{expression}) ...) @var{body}
Each @var{formals} should be a formal arguments list as for a
@func{lambda} expression (cf section 4.1.4 of the @rnrs{5}).

The @var{expression}s are evaluated in the current environment, the
variables of the @var{formals} are bound to fresh locations, the return
values of the @var{expression}s are stored in the variables, the
@var{body} is evaluated in the extended environment, and the values of
the last expression of @var{body} are returned.  The @var{body} is a
@code{tail-body} (cf section 3.5 of the @rnrs{5}).

The matching of each @var{formals} to values is as for the matching of
@var{formals} to arguments in a @func{lambda} expression, and it is an
error for an @var{expression} to return a number of values that does not
match its corresponding @var{formals}.

Examples:

@example
(let-values ([(a b . c) (values 1 2 3 4)])
  (list a b c))
=> (1 2 (3 4))

(let ([a 'a]
      [b 'b]
      [x 'x]
      [y 'y])
  (let-values ([(a b) (values x y)]
               [(x y) (values a b)])
    (list a b x y)))
=> (x y a b)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax {let*-values} ((@var{formals} @var{expression}) ...) @var{body}
Each @var{formals} should be a formal arguments list as for a
@func{lambda} expression (cf section 4.1.4 of the @rnrs{5}).

@func{let*-values} is similar to @func{let-values}, but the bindings are
performed sequentially from left to right, and the region of a binding
indicated by @code{(formals expression)} is that part of the
@func{let*-values} expression to the right of the binding.  Thus the
second binding is done in an environment in which the first binding is
visible, and so on.

Example:

@example
(let ([a 'a]
      [b 'b]
      [x 'x]
      [y 'y])
  (let*-values ([(a b) (values x y)]
                [(x y) (values a b)])
    (list a b x y)))
=> (x y x y)
@end example
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

