@c page
@node srfi string-ports
@appendixsec @ansrfi{6} basic string ports


@cindex @srfi{} string-ports


@noindent
The following library:

@example
(srfi string-ports)
@end example

@noindent
is by William D Clinger as the reference implementation for @ansrfi{6};
see:

@center @url{http://srfi.schemers.org/srfi-6/srfi-6.html}

@noindent
for more details.  The following documentation is an unofficial Texinfo
reformatting and minor modification of the original document by Marco
Maggi @email{marcomaggi@@gna.org} (Fri Oct 24, 2008).

@menu
* srfi string-ports license::   String--ports document license.
* srfi string-ports abstract::  Abstract.
* srfi string-ports rationale:: Rationale.
* srfi string-ports spec::      Specification.
@end menu


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@c page
@node srfi string-ports license
@appendixsubsec String--ports document license


@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} 1999 William D Clinger.  All Rights Reserved.

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining a
copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
``Software''), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be included
in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED ``AS IS'', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@c page
@node srfi string-ports abstract
@appendixsubsec Abstract


@noindent
Scheme's I/O primitives are extended by adding three new procedures that

@itemize
@item
create an input port from a string;

@item
create an output port whose contents are accumulated in Scheme's working
memory instead of an external file;

@item
extract the accumulated contents of an in--memory output port and return
them in the form of a string.
@end itemize


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@c page
@node srfi string-ports rationale
@appendixsubsec Rationale


@noindent
Scheme's procedures for performing input and output from and to ports
become more useful when extended by string ports.  The interface
described here has been in use since 1986 or before, and is currently
supported by several of the major implementations.


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@c page
@node srfi string-ports spec
@appendixsubsec Specification


@cindex @srfi{} string-ports api


@noindent
This specification is taken from the MacScheme Reference Manual.

@defun open-input-string @var{string}
Take a string and return an input port that delivers characters from the
string.  The port can be closed by @func{close-input-port}, though its
storage will be reclaimed by the garbage collector if it becomes
inaccessible.

Example:

@example
(define p (open-input-string "(a . (b . c . ())) 34"))

(input-port? p)                 =>  #t
(read p)                        =>  (a b c)
(read p)                        =>  34
(eof-object? (peek-char p))     =>  #t
@end example
@end defun


@defun open-output-string
Return an output port that will accumulate characters for retrieval by
@func{get-output-string}.  The port can be closed by the procedure
@code{close-output-port}, though its storage will be reclaimed by the
garbage collector if it becomes inaccessible.

@example
(let ([q (open-output-string)]
      [x '(a b c)])
  (write (car x) q)
  (write (cdr x) q)
  (get-output-string q))
  =>  "a(b c)"
@end example
@end defun


@defun get-output-string @var{output-port}
Given an output port created by @func{open-output-string}, return a
string consisting of the characters that have been output to the port so
far.
@end defun


@c ------------------------------------------------------------

