\input texinfo.tex
@c %**start of header
@setfilename chicken-egg-coops.info
@settitle Chicken Scheme Egg: COOPS
@c %**end of header

@include macros.texi

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------
@c Macros.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@ifhtml
@macro coops{}
@acronym{coops}
@end macro
@end ifhtml
@ifnothtml
@macro coops{}
@acronym{COOPS}
@end macro
@end ifnothtml

@macro syntax{NAME}
@code{\NAME\}
@end macro


@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Values.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@set TITLE                      @coops{} Chicken Egg

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the full
@c name of this package.
@set PACKAGE                    @coops{}

@c To be used as @value{PACKAGE} whenever we need to include the
@c nickname of the project: the name that is used to compose the
@c distribution tarball or the web address.
@set PACKAGE_NICKNAME           coops

@c To be used as @value{AUTHOR} whenever we need to include the list of
@c authors of this document.
@set AUTHOR                     Dorai Sitaram

@c To be used as @value{COPYRIGHT_YEARS} whenever we need to include the
@c list of copyright years.
@set COPYRIGHT_YEARS            1996

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Copyright notice.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@copying
This document describes @value{PACKAGE}, an object system for Scheme that provides:

@itemize
@item
Classes with multiple inheritance.

@item
Generic procedures.

@item
Methods that can specialize on one or more arguments (multimethods).

@item
Before, after, and around auxiliary methods in addition to primary methods.

@item
@func{call-next-method} and @func{next-method?} in primary and around methods.

@item
Standard method combination (the default ``demon'' protocol used in CLOS).

@item
SRFI-17 setters as generic procedures.
@end itemize

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} 1996, Dorai Sitaram@*
All rights reserved.
@end copying

@c page
@c ------------------------------------------------------------
@c Headers.
@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@titlepage
@title @value{TITLE}
@author @value{AUTHOR}
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ifinfo
@dircategory Development
@direntry
* chicken-egg-coops: (chicken-egg-coops).  @coops{} Chicken Egg.
@end direntry
@end ifinfo

@c ------------------------------------------------------------

@ignore
@syncodeindex tp cp
@syncodeindex vr cp
@syncodeindex fn cp
@end ignore

@c page
@ifnottex
@node Top
@top @value{TITLE}

@insertcopying

@menu
* overview::                    Overview of the package.
* classes::                     Classes.
* generics::                    Generic procedures.

Appendices

* Package License::             Package license.
* history::                     Version history.
* references::                  Bibliography and references.

Indexes

* concept index::               An entry for each concept.
* function index::              An entry for each function.
* variable index::              An entry for each variable.
* type index::                  An entry for each type.
@end menu
@end ifnottex

@c page
@node overview
@chapter Overview of the package

This document describes @value{PACKAGE}, an object system for Scheme that provides:

@itemize
@item
Classes with multiple inheritance.

@item
Generic procedures.

@item
Methods that can specialize on one or more arguments (multimethods).

@item
Before, after, and around auxiliary methods in addition to primary methods.

@item
@func{call-next-method} and @func{next-method?} in primary and around methods.

@item
Standard method combination (the default ``demon'' protocol used in CLOS).

@item
SRFI-17 setters as generic procedures.
@end itemize

@coops{} is based on ScmObj (@url{http://www.ccs.neu.edu/home/dorai/scmobj/scmobj.html}) by Dorai
Sitaram and was ported to CHICKEN and heavily extended by Felix Winkelmann.

Typically, to install the egg we should execute:

@example
$ (umask 0 ; chicken-install coops -sudo)
@end example

To compile code using the library we should use the form:

@example
(require-extension coops)
@end example

@noindent
and optionally:

@example
(require-extension coops-primitive-objects)
@end example

@c page
@node classes
@chapter Classes


@menu
* classes definition::          Defining classes.
* classes slot options::        Slot options.
* classes operations::          Operations on classes.
* classes instances::           Creating instances.
@end menu

@c page
@node classes definition
@section Defining classes


@deffn Syntax define-class @var{CLASSNAME} [(@var{SUPERCLASS} @dots{}) [(@var{SLOTSPEC} ...) @var{CLASSOPTION} ...]]
Define a @coops{} class and assign it to the variable @var{CLASSNAME}` (which should be a symbol).
@code{(@var{SUPERCLASS} @dots{})} is a list of expressions evaluating to classes from which the
newly defined class should inherit.  If no superclasses are given or the superclass list is empty,
then @code{<standard-object>} is assumed to be the default superclass.

@var{SLOTSPEC} specifies a slot (commonly called an instance variable) and should be either a symbol
naming the slot or a list of the form:

@example
(@var{SLOTNAME} @vari{SLOTOPTION} @vari{OPTIONVALUE} @dots{})
@end example

The syntax @code{(@var{SLOTNAME} @var{INITFORM})} is also a valid @var{SLOTSPEC} and is equivalent
to:

@example
(@var{SLOTNAME} initform: @var{INITFORM})
@end example

An instance always contains all the slots of all superclasses in addition to its own slots.

Classes are first--class values and are actually instances themselves, of the class
@code{<standard-class>} (see below for more details).
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax make-class [@var{CLASSNAME}] (@var{SUPERCLASS} @dots{}) [(@var{SLOTNAME} @dots{}) [@var{METACLASS}]]
Define a class.  @syntax{define-class} is syntactic sugar around this form and is usually preferred.
@syntax{make-class} allows the creation of @emph{anonymous} (that is: unnamed) classes.
@end deffn


@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading Class options


@deffn {Class Option} {metaclass:} @var{CLASS}
The class of which the newly defined class should be an instance (classes are instances, too).  The
default meta--class is @code{<standard-class>}.  Use this option if you feel adventurous.
@end deffn

@c page
@node classes slot options
@section Slot options


@deffn {Slot Option} {reader:} @var{NAME}
Define a method on the generic procedure @var{NAME} that takes an instance of the defined class as
its sole argument and return the value of the instance slot with the same name.  This is equivalent
to:

@example
(define-method (@var{NAME} (obj @var{CLASSNAME}))
  (slot-value obj '@var{NAME}))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Slot Option} {writer:} @var{NAME}
Define a method on the generic procedure @var{NAME} that takes as arguments an instance of the
defined class argument and a value and assigns the value to the instance slot with the same
name.  This is equivalent to:

@example
(define-method (@var{NAME} (obj @var{CLASSNAME}) val)
  (set! (slot-value obj '@var{NAME}) val))
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Slot Option} {accessor:} @var{NAME}
Similar to:

@example
(begin
  (define-method (@var{NAME} (obj @var{CLASSNAME}))
    (slot-value obj '@var{NAME}))
  (define-method ((setter @var{NAME}) (obj @var{CLASSNAME}) val)
    (set! (slot-value obj '@var{NAME}) val)))
@end example

So, we are defining a generic procedure method for accessing the slot, together with a @emph{setter}
that allows assigning new values to the slot with the syntax:

@example
(set! (@var{NAME} obj) val)
@end example
@end deffn


@deffn {Slot Option} {initform:} @var{EXPRESSION}
If an instance of the defined class is created and this slot has not been given an initialisation
argument, then @var{EXPRESSION} will be evaluated and the result assigned to the slot.
@end deffn

@c page
@node classes operations
@section Operations on classes


@defun class-name @var{CLASS}
Return the name of @var{CLASS}, if it has one, or @false{} it not.
@end defun


@defun subclass? @vari{CLASS} @varii{CLASS}
Return @true{} if @vari{CLASS} is equal to @varii{CLASS}` or if it is a subclass of @varii{CLASS} or
@false{} otherwise.
@end defun


@c page
@node classes instances
@section Creating instances


@defun make @var{CLASS} @vari{SLOTNAME} @vari{INITFORM} @dots{}
Create an instance of the @var{CLASS} and initialises the slots given in the remaining arguments.
The new instance is returned.  Slots not given which have been declared to have an @code{initform:}
will be initialized by evaluating that form.  All other slots will be uninitialised.
@end defun


@defun class-of @var{X}
Return the class of @var{X} or @true{} if @var{X} is not a class instance.
@end defun


@defun initialize-instance @var{OBJECT}
A generic procedure that is automatically invoked after a call to @func{make} and which initialises
the remaining slots of @var{OBJECT} to initforms given in the class definition.  If you just want to
use this as a constructor, @code{(call-next-method)} can be used to initialize the slots.
@end defun

@c page
@node generics
@chapter Generic procedures


@menu
* generics definition::         Defining multimethods.
* generics slots::              Slots access.
* generics predefined classes:: Predefined classes.
* generics predefined procs::   Predefined generic procedures.
* generics primitive classes::  Primitive classes.
* generics limitations::        Bugs and limitations.
* generics examples::           Examples.
@end menu

@c page
@node generics definition
@section Defining multimethods


Generic procedures are like normal procedures but contain a hidden reference to a generic procedure
object that holds additional information like method-tables.  We can define generic procedures
explicitly with the @syntax{define-generic} and @func{make-generic-procedure} syntactic forms or
implicitly by using @syntax{define-method}.


@syntax{slot-value} and @syntax{class-of} can be used on generic procedures and will transparently
access the generic procedure object.


@defun generic-procedure? @var{X}
Returns @true{} if @var{X} is a generic procedure or @false{} otherwise.
@end defun


@deffn Syntax define-generic (@var{NAME} @var{ARGUMENT} @dots{})
Define a generic procedure, a procedure specialized for one or more argument types.  @var{ARGUMENT}
defines the number of specialized arguments this generic procedure shoud use to dispatch to the
correct method.  The generic procedure may receive additional arguments, but those will not be used
to determine the method.  This form is roughly equivalent to:

@example
(define @var{NAME}
  (make-generic-procedure @var{ARGUMENT} @dots{}))
@end example

We can use the syntax:

@example
(define-generic ((setter @var{NAME}) @var{ARGUMENT} @dots{}))
@end example

@noindent
to define a SRFI-17 setter on @var{NAME} that is itself a generic procedure.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax define-method (@var{NAME} [@var{QUALIFIER}] [(@vari{ARGUMENT} @vari{CLASS}) @dots{}] @dots{}) @var{BODY} @dots{}
Define a method specialized for arguments of the classes @vari{CLASS} on the generic procedure
@var{NAME}.  If @var{NAME} holds a method for the same argument classes, the previously defined
method is replaced.

If no generic procedure has previously been defined for @var{NAME}, then a generic procedure
definition is done implicitly.  Whether it can be assumed a definition exists is assumed to be the
case when one of the following holds true:

@itemize
@item
@var{NAME} is an imported value binding.

@item
A generic procedure has been defined with @code{(define-generic @var{NAME} @dots{})} in the same
compilation unit or the same interpreter session and is lexically visible:

@example
(define-method ((setter @var{NAME}) @dots{}) @var{BODY} @dots{})
@end example

@noindent
is allowed and supported.
@end itemize

@var{QUALIFIER} may be one of the keywords @code{primary:}, @code{before:}, @code{after:} or
@code{around:} and mark the method as being either a primary (default) method, a method that is
called before or after the primary method or a method that is ``wrapped'' around more specific
methods.  @code{before:} methods are invoked from most specific to least specific.  @code{after:}
methods are invoked from least specific to most specific.  @code{around:} methods can chose to
invoke the next most specific method with the same arguments by calling @code{(call-next-method)}
with no arguments.

All arguments of the form @code{(@var{ARGUMENT} @var{CLASS})} are specialized up to the first
occurrence of a plain symbol or until a ``rest'' argument or extended lambda-list marker
(@code{#!rest}, @code{#!optional} or @code{#!key}) is encountered.
@end deffn


@deffn Syntax make-generic-procedure @var{ARGUMENT} @dots{}
Create a generic procedure, a procedure decorated with a hidden generic procedure object of class
@code{<generic-procedure>}.  @var{ARGUMENT} is the list of specialized arguments this procedure
should receive.  Methods for this generic procedure may accept more required or optional arguments,
but the number of specialised arguments must be the same.
@end deffn

@c page
@node generics slots
@section Slots access


@defun slot-value @var{OBJECT} @var{SLOTNAME}
Return the slot named @var{SLOTNAME} of the class instance @var{OBJECT}, signalling an error if no
such slot exists.  We can use the form:

@example
(set! (slot-value @var{OBJECT} @var{SLOTNAME}) @var{VAL})
@end example

@noindent
to assign a value to a slot.
@end defun


@defun slot-initialized? @var{OBJECT} @var{SLOTNAME}
Return @true{} if @var{OBJECT} has a slot named @var{SLOTNAME} or @false{} otherwise.
@end defun

@c page
@node generics predefined classes
@section Predefined classes


@deftp Class <standard-object>
The base class of classes defined with @syntax{define-class}.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <standard-class>
The class of classes (classes are class instances themselves).  This implies that
@code{<standard-class>} is an instance of itself.
@end deftp


@deftp Class <generic-procedure>
A subclass of @code{<procedure>} that is the class of generic procedure objects.
@end deftp


@deftp Class {#t}
The superclass of all other classes.
@end deftp

@c page
@node generics predefined procs
@section Predefined generic procedures


@defun print-object @var{OBJECT} @var{PORT}
A generic procedure that is invoked when @var{OBJECT} is printed.
@end defun

@c page
@node generics primitive classes
@section Primitive classes


@dfn{Primitive classes} are classes representing primitive data objects like numbers, strings and
record structures.  To be able to define generic procedures specialized on these types, primitive
classes can be defined and associated with a predicate that returns a true value for objects that
should be considered of the type represented by the class.


@deffn Syntax define-primitive-class @var{NAME} [(@var{SUPERCLASS} @dots{})] @var{PREDICATE}
Define a primitive class with the name @var{NAME} and the given list of superclasses.  If no
superclasses are specified, then the superclass list defaults to @code{(<primitive-object>)}.
@var{PREDICATE} should be a procedure of one argument determining whether the argument is a member
of the newly defined primitive class.

The predicate should be referentially transparent.
@end deffn

@c ------------------------------------------------------------------------

@subsubheading primitive classes


The extension @code{coops-primitive-objects} defines additional classes that allow defining generic
procedures on objects used in the CHICKEN core libraries.


@deftp Class <primitive-object>
This is the base class of all primitive object classes.  Load the extension
@code{coops-primitive-objects} to pull in @code{<primitive-object>} and its derivatives.
@end deftp


Other classes deriving from @code{<primitive-object>}

@multitable {<condition-variable>} {Any immediate object} {<primitive-object>}
@headitem CLASS @tab OBJECT TYPE @tab SUPERCLASSES
@item @code{<immediate>} @tab Any immediate object @tab @code{<primitive-object>}
@item @code{<boolean>} @tab @true{} or @false{} @tab @code{<immediate>}
@item @code{<eof-object>} @tab end of file @tab @code{<immediate>}
@item @code{<char>} @tab Characters @tab @code{<immediate>}
@item @code{<record>} @tab Record instances  @tab @code{<primitive-object>}
@item @code{<sequence>} @tab @tab @code{<primitive-object>}
@item @code{<list>} @tab @tab @code{<sequence>}
@item @code{<null>} @tab The empty list @tab @code{<immediate> <list>}
@item @code{<pair>} @tab @tab @code{<list>}
@item @code{<vector>} @tab Vectors  @tab @code{<sequence>}
@item @code{<number-vector>}  @tab SRFI-4 vectors @tab @code{<sequence> <record>}
@item @code{<u8vector>} @tab @tab @code{<number-vector>}
@item @code{<s8vector>} @tab @tab @code{<number-vector>}
@item @code{<u16vector>} @tab @tab @code{<number-vector>}
@item @code{<s16vector>} @tab @tab @code{<number-vector>}
@item @code{<u32vector>} @tab @tab @code{<number-vector>}
@item @code{<s32vector>} @tab @tab @code{<number-vector>}
@item @code{<f32vector>} @tab @tab @code{<number-vector>}
@item @code{<f64vector>} @tab @tab @code{<number-vector>}
@item @code{<string>} @tab @tab @code{<sequence>}
@item @code{<char-set>} @tab SRFI-13 char sets  @tab @code{<sequence>} @code{<record>}
@item @code{<symbol>} @tab @tab @code{<primitive-object>}
@item @code{<keyword>} @tab Keyword symbols @tab @code{<symbol>}
@item @code{<number>} @tab @tab @code{<primitive-object>}
@item @code{<integer>} @tab @tab @code{<number>}
@item @code{<exact-number>}  @tab @tab @code{<integer>}
@item @code{<inexact-number>}  @tab @tab @code{<number>}
@item @code{<fixnum>} @tab @tab @code{<exact-number> <immediate>}
@item @code{<flonum>} @tab @tab @code{<inexact-number>}
@item @code{<thread>} @tab SRFI-18 thread @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<mutex>} @tab SRFI-18 mutex @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<condition-variable>} @tab SRFI-18 condition variables @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<condition>} @tab Condition objects  @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<tcp-listener>}  @tab @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<continuation>}  @tab @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<regexp>} @tab Regular expression  @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<pointer>} @tab Machine pointer @tab @code{<primitive-object>}
@item @code{<locative>} @tab @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<promise>} @tab created with @code{delay} @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<queue>} @tab @tab @code{<sequence> <record>}
@item @code{<hash-table>} @tab @tab @code{<sequence> <record>}
@item @code{<blob>} @tab @tab @code{<primitive-object>}
@item @code{<port>} @tab @tab @code{<record>}
@item @code{<stream-port>} @tab file port @tab @code{<port>}
@item @code{<custom-port>} @tab @tab @code{<port>}
@item @code{<string-port>} @tab @tab @code{<port>}
@item @code{<tcp-port>} @tab @tab @code{<port>}
@item @code{<procedure>} @tab @tab @code{<primitive-object>}
@end multitable
@c page
@node generics limitations
@section Bugs and limitations


@syntax{define-generic}, @syntax{define-method} and @func{make-generic-procedure} do currently not
check for argument--list congruence, so it is important to make sure that the number of specialised
arguments is always correct for the given generic procedure.

@c page
@node generics examples
@section Examples


A simple class:

@example
(define-class <stack> ()
  ((content '())))              ; or "(content initform: '())"

(define-method (push (val #t) (stack <stack>))
  (set! (slot-value stack 'content) (cons val (slot-value stack 'content))))

(define-method (pop (stack <stack>))
  (let* ((c (slot-value stack 'content))
         (x (car c)))
    (set! (slot-value stack 'content) (cdr c))
    x))

(define-method (empty? (stack <stack>))
  (null? (slot-value stack 'content)))
@end example

A subclass of @code{<stack>}, with logging:

@example
(define-class <stack-with-logging> (<stack>)
  ((logfile initform: (current-output-port) accessor: stack-logfile)))

(define-method (push before: (val #t) (stack <stack-with-logging>))
  (with-output-to-port (stack-logfile stack)  ; uses accessor method
    (lambda () (print "stack: pushing " val))))

(define-method (pop before: (stack <stack-with-logging>))
  (with-output-to-port (stack-logfile stack)
    (lambda ()
      (print "stack: popping " (car (slot-value stack 'content))))))

(define-method ((setter stack-logfile) before: (stack <stack-with-logging>) file)
  (print "stack: setting logfile to " file))
@end example

An example of a custom @func{initialize-instance} with @func{call-next-method}:

@example
(define-class <c> ()
  ((type initform: 'int reader: type))
  ((content)))

(define-method (initialize-instance (c <c>))
  (call-next-method)
  (set! (slot-value c 'content) (if (eq? (type c) 'int) 0 "")))
@end example

@c page
@node Package License
@appendix Package License


Copyright @copyright{} 1996, Dorai Sitaram@*
All rights reserved.

Redistribution and use in source and binary forms, with or without modification, are permitted
provided that the following conditions are met:

@itemize
@item
Redistributions of source code must retain the above copyright notice, this list of conditions and
the following disclaimer.

@item
Redistributions in binary form must reproduce the above copyright notice, this list of conditions
and the following disclaimer in the documentation and/or other materials provided with the
distribution.

@item
Neither the name of the author nor the names of its contributors may be used to endorse or promote
products derived from this software without specific prior written permission.
@end itemize

THIS SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED BY THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS AND CONTRIBUTORS ``AS IS'' AND ANY EXPRESS OR
IMPLIED WARRANTIES, INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, THE IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY AND
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE ARE DISCLAIMED.  IN NO EVENT SHALL THE COPYRIGHT HOLDERS OR
CONTRIBUTORS BE LIABLE FOR ANY DIRECT, INDIRECT, INCIDENTAL, SPECIAL, EXEMPLARY, OR CONSEQUENTIAL
DAMAGES (INCLUDING, BUT NOT LIMITED TO, PROCUREMENT OF SUBSTITUTE GOODS OR SERVICES; LOSS OF USE,
DATA, OR PROFITS; OR BUSINESS INTERRUPTION) HOWEVER CAUSED AND ON ANY THEORY OF LIABILITY, WHETHER
IN CONTRACT, STRICT LIABILITY, OR TORT (INCLUDING NEGLIGENCE OR OTHERWISE) ARISING IN ANY WAY OUT OF
THE USE OF THIS SOFTWARE, EVEN IF ADVISED OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.

@c page
@node history
@appendix Version History


@code{1.0}: Initial release for CHICKEN 5, based on version 1.7 from CHICKEN 4.

@c page
@node references
@appendix Bibliography and references



@c page
@node concept index
@appendix An entry for each concept

@printindex cp

@node function index
@appendix An entry for each function.

@printindex fn

@node variable index
@appendix An entry for each variable.

@printindex vr

@node type index
@appendix An entry for each type.

@printindex tp

@contents
@bye

@c end of file
@c Local Variables:
@c mode: texinfo
@c TeX-master: t
@c End:
